---
title: Pelvic Pain
avatar: hispanic_female_with_flower
---

Pelvic pain can be caused by a variety of things. Many women report
pelvic pain at some time in their life. There may be more than one
reason for the pain. In some women the pain is intermittent (comes and
goes). Other women may feel pain only during certain times of the
month, and some others may experience chronic pelvic pain. Your doctor
can work with you to determine possible reasons for the pain, and a
treatment plan.

Pain may only occur during intercourse. This type of pelvic pain may
have physical or psychological causes. During sex, a woman’s body goes
through several changes. During the first stages of arousal when the
vagina and vulva secrete moisture, the muscles in the vagina relax. The
clitoris gets bigger as the blood flows into the pelvis. These changes
also cause the vagina to get deeper and wider, preparing to receive the
penis. If any of these changes do not occur, intercourse can be painful.

If a woman is not aroused, dryness may cause the vulva to be irritated
or sensitive. The vulva is outside the vagina. Pain outside the vagina
can also be caused by certain soaps, vaginal sprays, cysts, or an
infection.

If pain is felt inside the vagina it may be caused by dryness. Pain in
the vagina may also be caused by vaginal sores or infection. Some women
find that a lubricant helps. Remember that only water based lubricants
are safe to use with a condom. Other kinds of lubricants can cause the
condom to break or become weakened. A frank discussion with your partner
about what arouses you may help. Perhaps you need your partner to allow
extra time for you to become fully aroused.

If a woman has vaginitas, such as a yeast infection, her vagina may also
be irritated or inflamed. This can also cause pain in the vagina. If you
have itching, burning, or a discharge, you may have vaginitis. Your
doctor can prescribe medication to be used vaginally or an oral
medication to treat vaginitis. These infections are usually treated with
antibiotics. Once treated, the pain should improve within a few days.
These infections may recur. Your doctor may recommend that your partner
be treated also.

Pain on intercourse can also be caused when the muscles of the vagina do
not relax during intercourse. Sometimes this happens due to scaring of
the vulva or vagina from childbirth, infection or sensitivity to the
condoms, spermicides or exposure to other irritants.

Sometimes this type of pain may be related to fear, past sexual abuse,
or rape. Discuss this with your healthcare provider. Treatment may be
helpful. Because sex is so closely tied to our emotions, pain on
intercourse can be affected by our state of mind. Many emotional factors
are at play. Fear of getting pregnant or of contacting an STD may cause
an inability to relax during sex, or may cause a woman to not produce
enough lubrication. Exploring the emotions tied to sex may help uncover
a source of pain that can be treated with the help of a counselor.

If a woman experiences deep pelvic pain, she may have pelvic
Inflammatory Disease, Endometriosis, Ovarian cysts or an Ectopic
Pregnancy. For a diagnosis and treatment plan, see your doctor.

Sometimes, a Urinary Tract infection, or an infection of the bladder or
kidneys can cause pain in the pelvic region. These types of infections
usually are accompanied by pain on urination, strong urge to urinate, or
pain in one or both sides. They are usually treated with antibiotics.

Ovarian cysts are fluid filled sacks. Some cysts are a normal part of
the menstrual cycle. Often the cyst will go away as the woman’s period
ends. A dull ache or heaviness in the pelvis may be due to cysts that do
not go away. If these cysts cause sharp pains, it may be due to the cyst
leaking fluid but not dissolving. Your doctor should be able to detect
cysts during your pelvic exam. If a cyst causes problems and does not go
away by itself, your doctor may advise surgery.

Fibroids are growths that occur on the inside of the uterus, on its
outer surface, or deep in the walls of the uterus. They are not
cancerous. Fibroids may cause heavier, more frequent periods with pain
or pressure in the lower back or abdomen. Some fibroids may not cause
any discomfort at all.

To determine the cause of your pelvic pain you will need to schedule a
Well Woman Exam here at the Woman’s Health Center. Your doctor will
review a detailed gynecological history, do a pelvic exam, and may order
outside tests.

Some tests that are used to diagnose problems are:

- MRI (Magnetic Resonance Imaging) This allows your doctor to see a
  picture of your internal organs, and pelvic structures.
- Sonogram allows your doctor to see images of your uterus and ovaries
  with sound waves reflected off internal organs.
- CT SCAN. This is an x-ray that shows internal organs.
- Laparoscopy. This is a minimally invasive surgical procedure used to
  look up close at the organs.

There are so many other tests that can be ordered to determine the exact
nature of the problem. Your doctor will order necessary tests of refer
you to the proper specialist.

