---
title: Birth Control Myths
avatar: birth_control_pills
---

There are a lot of myths about birth control.  There is also a lot of
misinformation about how contraception works, and some methods that
simply do not protect at all.

Common Myths
------------

I am breastfeeding so I obviously can't get pregnant:

: Breastfeeding can postpone ovulation, but there is no guarantee.
Ovulation can occur even when a woman is breastfeeding.  A nursing
mother should continue to use contraception if she does not want to get
pregnant.

A Woman must have an orgasm in order to get pregnant:

: Not true.  While a man must ejaculate sperm to fertilize the woman's
egg, the woman does not need to have an orgasm for the sperm to join
with the egg.  Most women release an egg once a month during her
reproductive years.  This happens whether or not a woman has sexual
contact.  If the egg is not fertilized, it will be shed with her next
period.

Douching prevents pregnancy:

: Douching, even immediately after intercourse does not interfere with
fertilization of the egg.  Once the sperm enters the uterus during sex,
no amount of douching will interfere with the sperm fertilizing the egg.

I can't get pregnant if I have sex standing up, or if I am on top:

: Wrong again...Sexual positions have **nothing** to do with conception.
When a man ejaculates, the sperm moves to the cervix right away.
Gravity does not protect you from getting pregnant.

Plastic wrap or a balloon is as good as a condom:

: Condoms only work some of the time.  Sometimes they tear, or come off.
Balloons and plastic wrap don't fit well and are not even as effective
as a condom.

Having sex at the "safe time" of the month is as good as any birth
control I can use:

: To help you better understand the menstrual cycle:  There are four
hormones involved in the woman's reproductive cycle.  There is a very
delicate balance involved.  Lots of things can upset the balance making
what you consider a "safe time" not so safe.  Some examples are
antibiotics, stress, illness, age and other medications.  Pinpointing
the exact time of ovulation can be difficult.  Some women believe that
they can only get pregnant one day a month.  This is also a myth.  While
it is true that a woman only ovulates once a month, which day is a
mystery.

Birth Control Pills are effective the first day you start taking them:

: Most doctors recommend using a back-up method for the first 7 days
after you have started the pill.  There are hormones in the pills that
effect ovulation.  Birth control pills are not immediately effective.

A woman can't get pregnant the first time she has sex.

: A woman can get pregnant every time she ovulates.  Once a woman
reaches puberty and begins to ovulate, she can become pregnant, even if
it is the first time.

Taking a shower or urinating immediately after sex will prevent
pregnancy.

: Urinating or washing after sex does not stop the sperm from entering
the uterus through the cervix.  Sperm make their way quickly to the
uterus.

If my partner "pulls out" before he ejaculates, I won't get pregnant.

: This is often called the "withdrawal" method.  It is not very
effective.  Some of the sperm is released even before a man ejaculates.
Some men may not have the willpower, or be able to withdraw in time.

Accurate and reliable information about contraception is important.
Check the source of the information you are relying on.  A great deal of
information is available on the web.  Your doctor can also provide you
with appropriate information during a birth control consult.  Feel free
to schedule a consult here at the Woman's Health Center for all your
birth control needs.

