---
title: Liberalization of Abortion Laws; Roe v. Wade
---

Between 1967 and 1973 one-third of the states liberalized or repealed
their criminal abortion laws. However, the right to have an abortion in
all states was only made available to American women in 1973 when the
Supreme Court struck down the remaining restrictive state laws with its
ruling in Roe v Wade.The 1973 Supreme Court decision in Roe v Wade made
it possible for women to get safe, legal abortions from well-trained
medical practitioners. This led to dramatic decreases in
pregnancy-related injury and death.The Roe case arose out of a Texas law
that prohibited legal abortion except to save a woman’s life. At that
time, most other states had laws similar to the one in Texas. Those laws
forced large numbers of women to resort to illegal abortions.Jane Roe, a
21-year-old pregnant woman, represented all women who wanted abortions
but could not get them legally and safely. Henry Wade was the Texas
Attorney General who defended the law that made abortions illegal.After
hearing the case, the Supreme Court ruled that Americans right to
privacy included the right of a woman to decide whether to have
children, and the right of a woman and her doctor to make that decision
without state interference.

After Roe v. Wade
-----------------

The reaction to Roe was swift. Supporters of legal abortion rejoiced and
generally felt their battle was won. However, others faulted the Court
for the decision. Those opposed to legal abortion immediately began
working to prevent any federal or state funding for abortion and to
undermine or limit the effect of the decision.Some turned to measures
directly aimed at disrupting clinics where abortions were being
performed. Their tactics have included demonstrating in front of
abortion clinics, harassing people trying to enter, vandalizing clinic
property and blocking access to clinics.As time passed, the level of
anti-abortion violence escalated. Increasingly, clinic bombings,
physical attacks and even murders endanger abortion providers and create
a hostile environment for women seeking abortions.

Retreat from Roe v. Wade
------------------------

Initially, the framework of Roe v. Wade was the basis by which the
constitutionality of state abortion laws was determined. In recent
years, however, the Supreme Court has begun to allow more restrictions
on abortion.For instance, the Supreme Court’s ruling in Planned
Parenthood v. Casey in 1992 established that states can restrict
pre-viability abortions. Restrictions can be placed on first trimester
abortions in ways that are not medically necessary, as long as the
restrictions do not pace an “undue burden” on the women seeking abortion
services.Many states now have restrictions in place such as parental
involvement, mandatory waiting periods and biased counseling. Only the
requirement that a woman involve her spouse in her decision was
disallowed.

