---
title: Making Abortion Illegal
---

In the mid-to-late 1800s states began passing laws that made abortion
illegal. The motivations for anti-abortion laws varied from state to
state. One of these reasons including fears that the population would be
dominated by the children of newly arriving immigrants, whose birth
rates were higher than those of "native" Anglo-Saxon women.

Medical Practice
----------------

During the 1800s, all surgical procedures, including abortions, were
extremely risky. Hospitals were not common, antiseptics were unknown and
even the most respected doctors had only primitive medical educations.
Without today’s current technology, maternal and infant mortality rates
during childbirth were extraordinarily high. The dangers from abortion
were similar to the dangers from others surgeries that were now
outlawed.

As scientific methods began to dominate medical practice and
technologies were developed to prevent infection, medical care on the
whole became much safer and more effective. But by this time, the vast
majority of women who needed abortions had no choice but to get them
from illegal practitioners without these medical advances at their
disposal. The "back alley" abortion remained a dangerous, often deadly
procedure, while areas of legally sanctioned medicine improved
dramatically.

The Medical Establishment
-------------------------

The strongest force behind the drive to criminalize abortion was the
attempt by doctors to establish for themselves exclusive rights to
practice medicine. They wanted to prevent "untrained" practitioners,
including midwives, apothecaries and homeopaths, from competing with
them for patient's fees.

The best way to accomplish their goal was to eliminate one of the
principle procedures that kept these competitors in business. Rather
than openly admitting to such motives, the newly formed American Medical
Association (AMA) argued that abortion was both immoral and dangerous.
By 1910 all but one state had criminalized abortion except where
necessary, in the doctor’s judgment, to save the woman’s life. In this
way, legal abortion was successfully transformed into a
"physicians-only" practice.

Back-Alley Abortions
--------------------

The prohibition of legal abortion from the 1880s until 1973 came under
the same anti-obscenity or Comstock laws that prohibited the
dissemination of birth control information and services.

Criminalization of abortion did not reduce the numbers of women who
sought abortions. In the years before Roe v. Wade, the estimates of
illegal abortions ranged as high as 1.2 million per year. Although
accurate records could not be kept, it is known that between the 1880s
and 1973, many thousands of women were harmed as a result of illegal
abortion.

Many women died or suffered medical problems after attempting to
self-induce their abortions or going to untrained practitioners who
performed abortions with primitive methods or in unsanitary conditions.
During this time, hospital emergency room staff treated thousands of
women who either died or were suffering terrible effects of abortions
provided without adequate skill and care.

Some women were able to obtain relatively safer, although still illegal,
abortions from private doctors. This practice remained prevalent for the
first half of the twentieth century. The rate of reported abortions then
began to decline, partly because doctors faced increased scrutiny from
their peers and hospital administrators concerned about legality of
their operations.

