---
title: Reform to Improve Pregnancy Related Services
no-title: true
---

The Potential of Health Care Reform to improve Pregnancy-Related Services and Outcomes
======================================================================================

By:  Adam Sonfield

Having a child is, quite simply, expensive.  Even putting aside the
years of food, clothing, shelter, education and all the rest, the basic
human functions of pregnancy and childbirth involve, in the U.S.
society, thousands of dollars in medical expenses for prenatal care,
labor and delivery, and postpartum care for both the mother and the
infant.  And if there are any pregnancy-related complications, those
costs can increase dramatically. Even a short stay for a newborn in
intensive care can be expensive enough to bankrupt many American
parents, if they must pay out of pocket.

At the same time, there can be dramatic health consequences for mothers
and children if they do not obtain the appropriate care.  And although
there are a multitude of factors behind major health indicators like the
rates of maternal mortality and preterm  births, it is clear that
finacial hurdles-particularly for the uninsured and underinsured-are an
important reason why the United States lags behind most other developed
countries in the area.  According to the 2005 estimates from the World
Health Organization and other United Nations agencies, the U.S. maternal
mortality rate is higher than the rate in more than 30 other countries,
including most of Europe.  In fact, as was highlighted in a 2010 report
from Amnesty International, the U.S. rates of maternal mortality and
severe maternal complications have astually  grown worse in recent
years.

However, with the passage of the Patient Protection and Affordable Care
Act in March 2010, Americans have new reason for optimism about
improvements in maternal and child health.  Health care reform has the
potential to improve access to and use of a wide range of health care
services generally, and the law includes a sizable list of provisions
focused specifically on pregnancy-related care.  Better access to and
use of care, in turn, has the potential to address the distressing
disparities in maternal and child health found among certain segments of
the U.S. population, and between the United States and other developed
countries.

Coverage Before Reform
----------------------

One of the primary impetuses for health care reform, of course, was the
large numbers of U.S. residents who lacked health insurance.  By the
most recent government estimates, about 46 million people in the United
States were uninsured, amounting to 17% of the U.S. population younger
than 65.  That number includes more than 12 million women of
reproductive age (15-44), two in 10 women in that age group.

The Coverage to Come
--------------------

One expected consequence of health care reform is that consederably
fewer women will be uninsured prior to pregnancy.  According to
estimates from the Congressional Budget Office, 32 million fewer
Americans will be uninsured in 2019 than would otherwise be the case, as
a result of two major coverage expansions slated to become effective in
2014.  First, all states will be required to extend eligibility under
their Medicaid programs to all U.S. citizens and longtime legal
residents in families with incomes at or below 133% of poverty.
(Currently, most states have considerably lower thresholds for parents -
on average about 65% of poverty - and do not cover childless adults at
any income.)  Second, individuals and small employers will be able to
purchase private insurance coverage through new, state based
marketplaces known as exchanges; most of the currently uninsured will be
eligible for federal subsidy to make that insurance affordable.
Expanded coverage should mean that more women will have a regular doctor
or health center they rely upon, and fewer women will need to scramble
to pay for care during and after pregancy, or for care for their
newborns.  It should also mean that more women will be able to plan
their preganacies using contraception, ensure they are in good health
before conception and obtain early prenatal care - all of which are
important factors in maternal and child care.

Beyond its goal of expanding coverage, per se, health care reform
includes specific provisions designed to make coverage better for women
who are pregnant or trying to become pregnant.  Most notably, maternal
and newborn care is one of only 10 types of health care services
explicitly required by law to be included in what will become widely
known as the "essential health benefits package."  That package of
services -  which will be given greater detail by the U.S. Department of
Health and Human Services sometime before 2014 - will be covered for all
enrollees in all plans sold in the new exchanges, as well as in any new
individual and small group policies sold outside of the exchanges.  All
told, this mandate should eliminate most of the gaps in the maternity
coverage left by the PDA.

The new law also prohibits many of the abusive practices that insurance
companies have used to avoid adequately covering pregnant women and
infants:  Starting in 2014, health plans will no longer be allowed to
exclude or limit coverage for care relating to preexisting conditions,
or deny health coverage entirely to people because of such conditions.
For minors, that protection starts in September 2010.  Similarly, plans
in 2014 will be barred from charging higher premiums to women than to
men, a common practice known as gender rating that is based on the fact
that women make greater use of their insurance.

In addition, some key pregnancy-related serices will be available with
no cost-sharing.  All new private health plans, starting in September
2010, will be required to cover - without any out-of-pocket costs - a
series of preventive care items and services as described in preliminary
regulations issued by the  administration in July, the list of services
today includes folic acid suppliments to prevent certain birth defects,
STI testing for pregnant women, smoking cessation counseling (also newly
required under Medicaid) and a variety of other screenings and
vaccinations that are important components of prenatal care, along with
all of the preventive care guidelines are issued by the Institute of
Medicine.

Potential for Progress
----------------------

For maternal and child health advocates, this multipronged approach
comes none too soon. The 2010 Amnesty International report is but the
latest to raise alarms over what some consider a crisis in U. S.
maternal health, particularly among disadvantaged women. For example,
nearly one-quarter of black women initiate prenatal care late or not at
all, according to CDC data, a rate that is more than twice as high as
their white counterparts. This disparity contributes to disparate health
outcome as well, with black women experiencing at least twice the rates
of low-birth-weights births, infant mortality and maternal mortality as
white women. Major disparities also exist by geography, income and
education.

Many immigrants - both documented and undocumented - are also at a
disadvantage, even after health care reform. Although a 1986 federal law
requires hospitals to provide labor and delivery care to all women,
regardless if immigration status, women without legal status have long
been barred from Medicaid and CHIP for their prenatal and postpartum
care, and the new law bars them not only from receiving federal
subsidies for private insurance, but also from purchasing even
unsubsidized insurance through the exchanges. The news is better for
legal immigrants, as a 2009 law allowed states to cover
pregnancy-related care for recent immigrants under Medicaid and CHIP,
eliminating a five-year waiting period put in place in 1996.

Granted, coverage and access are not the only determinants of health
care use. Women face a host of other difficulties, ranging from
logistical hurdles (e.g., transportation, child care and lack of
personal or sick time at work) to quality of care issues (e.g., the need
for language services, cultural competency training and night and
weekend hours) to social barriers (e.g., low health literacy,
immigration concerns, mistrust of providers and discrimination).
Moreover, health care use is only one factor affecting individual and
community health status, and U.S. health disparities are in large part a
result of broader societal inequities, from the availability of jobs and
education to the prevalence of crime and pollution. Nevertheless,
improved insurance coverage and access to affordable, appropriate health
care is an essential first step to help address the nationâ€™s disparities
in maternal and child health.

