---
title: The Hyde Amendment
avatar: black-female
---

After Roe v. Wade decriminalized abortion in 1973, Medicaid covered
abortion care without any restrictions.  In 1976, Representative Henry
Hyde (R-IL) introduced an amendment that later passed to limit federal
funding for abortion care.  Effective in 1977, this provision, known as
the Hyde Amendment, specifies what abortion services can be covered
under Medicaid.

Over the past two decades, Congress has debated the limited
circumstances under which federal funding for abortion should be
allowed.  For a brief period of time, coverage included cases of rape,
incest, life endangerment, and physical health damage to the woman.
However, beginning in 1979, the physical health exception was excluded,
and in 1981 rape and incest exceptions were also excluded.

In September 1993, Congress rewrote the provision to include Medicaid
funding for abortions in cases where the pregnancy resulted from rape
and incest.  The present version of the Hyde Amendment requires coverage
of abortion in cases of rape, incest and life endangerment.

The Impact of the Hyde Amendment
--------------------------------

Unique barriers face low-income women accessing comprehensive
reproductive health care.  Barriers to abortion access such as the lack
of providers, state laws delaying women from receiving timely care and
funding restrictions like the Hyde Amendment fall disproportionately on
low-income women who have limited resources with which to overcome
these obstacles.  The Guttmacher Institute has found that 20 - 35% of
Medicaid-eligible women who choose abortion carry their pregnancies to
term when funding is not available.  Additionally, lack of public
funding results in women waiting while they raise funds, postponing
their abortions until later in their pregnancies when the costs of
health care risks can be higher.  For women who are struggling to make
ends meet and who do not have insurance that covers abortion care, the
legal right to have an abortion does not guarantee access.

The restrictions imposed by the Hyde Amendment unfairly jeopardize the
health and well-being of lower income women and their families.  Women
who do not have the ability to pay for abortion services may resort to
self-inducing an abortion or obtaining unsafe, illegal abortions from
untrained practitioners.  Also, the Hyde Amendment harms women's health
by denying coverage for abortion services in cases where women have
serious physical or mental health concerns.

Challenges to Hyde
------------------

The first challenges to the Hyde Amendment came shortly after its
implementation.  The Supreme Court has held that the Hyde Amendment
restrictions are constitutional and that states participating in
Medicaid are only required to cover abortion services for which they
receive federal funding rather than all medically necessary abortions.
Challenges under state constitutions have been more successful.  Several
lawsuits have been brought in individual states arguing that state
constitutions afford greater protection for privacy and equal protection
than the federal Constitution.

Implementation of the Hyde Amendment
------------------------------------

The Hyde Amendment affects only federal spending.  States are free to
use their own funds to cover additional abortion services.  For example,
Hawaii, New York, and Washington have enacted laws funding abortions for
health reasons.  Other states, such as Maryland, cover abortions for
women whose pregnancies are affected by fetal abnormalities or present
serious health risks.  These expansions are important steps toward
ensuring equal access to health care for all women.

Prior to the 1993 expansion of the Hyde Amendment, thirty states chose
not to use their own Medicaid funds to cover abortions for pregnancies
resulting from rape or incest.  Initially, a number of states expressed
resistance to comply with the expanded Hyde Amendment, and presently
thirteen states are under court orders to comply and cover rape and
incest in addition to life endangerment.  Every court that has
considered the Hyde Amendment's application to a stateâ€™s Medicaid
program since 1993 has held that states continuing to participate in the
Medicaid program must cover abortions resulting from rape or incest in
order to be compliant with the Hyde Amendment, regardless of state laws
that may be more restrictive.

State Funding For Abortion Under Medicaid
-----------------------------------------

Funding under Hyde Amendment only:

: Alabama, Arkansas, Colorado, Delaware, District of Columbia, Florida,
Georgia, Idaho, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine, Michigan,
Missouri, Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire, North Carolina, North
Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina,
Tennessee, Texas, and Wyoming.

Hyde Amendment and Additional Health Circumstances:

: Indiana (physical health), Iowa (fetal abnormality), Mississippi
(fetal abnormality), Utah (physical health and fetal abnormality),
Virginia (fetal abnormality), and Wisconsin (physical health).

All or most health conditions:

: Alaska, Arizona, California, Connecticut, Hawaii, Illinois, Maryland,
Massachusetts, Minnesota, Montana, New Jersey, New Mexico, New York,
Oregon, Vermont, Washington, and West Virginia.

Noncompliant with the Hyde Amendment:

: South Dakota (life endangerment only).

Conclusion
----------

The Hyde Amendment marginalizes and stigmatizes abortion care rather
than recognizing it as an essential component of women's health and
denies low-income women basic reproductive health care.  The Hyde
Amendment is reauthorized each year under appropriations bills for the
Department of Labor and the Department of Health and Human Services.
The current restrictive version of the Hyde Amendment does not provide
coverage for abortions in cases of fetal abnormalities, or health
exceptions apart from life-threatening conditions.  Removing funding
restrictions for abortion care is an integral step in ensuring that
abortion remains safe, legal and accessible.  American women have had
the legal right to choose abortion for more than thirty years.  To
achieve reproductive equality for all women, restrictive barriers such
as the Hyde Amendment must be removed.

