---
title: ParaGard
avatar: three-females-on-stairs
---

The ParaGard is an Intrauterine Copper Contraceptive (ICC). It is made
of soft flexible plastic. It is T shaped with thin copper bands wrapped
around the arms and a copper thread wound around the stem. Overall,
ParaGard is just slightly larger than a quarter. This device has been
used since 1988.

The ParaGard is 99% effective which is as good as sterilization, but it
is not permanent. If you should choose to become pregnant, you can have
your ParaGard removed. Within a few months you should return to your
normal fertility.

The ParaGard is a convenient method that requires no daily attention.
The ParaGard should be checked monthly by feeling for the two small
strings in the vagina. The IUD does not interfere with intercourse in
any way and cannot be felt by your partner during intercourse.

While it is initially costly, over time, it is far less expensive than
birth control pills that you must pay for each month.

The ParaGard is the only hormone free IUD on the market. Women who do
not want to use hormonal birth control, or who should not use hormonal
birth control will find the ParaGard to be a very good choice. Therefore
there will be no hormone related risks nor side effects with the
ParaGard.

Some women will experience a heavier period for the first few months
after they get their IUD. This usually levels off as your body adjusts
to the new device. Some doctors recommend that women not use an IUD
until they have given birth at least once. Once you have a child, the
uterus is a little bigger and may be more accepting of the IUD. Each
doctor has their own protocol to determine when an IUD is a good choice
for a patient and when they would recommend an alternative.

IUDs do NOT cause infection. However, they do pose an increase risk of
Pelvic Inflammatory Disease for women with multiple sexual partners and
for women who may contract STDs. In the unlikely event that you get
pregnant on the IUD, you would need to have the device removed as soon
as possible. Becoming pregnant while using an IUD increases the likely
hood of ectopic pregnancy, infections, and premature labor and delivery.

The ParaGard is good for 10 years. 96% of women who use the ParaGard
report that they are well satisfied with this IUD.

It takes only a few minutes to get your IUD inserted. You may experience
a few cramps and "pinches" as it is installed. Most women do not report
it to be a painful experience. Your doctor may request you return
approximately 3 months after the insertion of your IUD for a brief check
up. Thereafter, you only need to have your regular pelvic exams as you
have in the past. Having an IUD does not require more frequent checkups.

