---
title: The Nuva Ring
avatar: nuvaring
---

The Nuva Ring works by releasing a small amount of synthetic progestin
and estrogen.  Like the birth control pills, the Nuva Ring prevents you
from releasing an egg and also thickens the cervical mucosa which may
prevent the sperm from reaching the egg.

The Nuva Ring is a small flexible ring which you insert in the vagina
once a month.  The Nuva Ring does not interfere with sexual intercourse.
Once in place, neither you nor your partner will feel the Nuva Ring in
the vagina.

After 21 days, you remove the ring and replace it with a new one after
one week.  With proper use, the Nuva Ring, though relatively new, should
be as effective as birth control pills at preventing pregnancy.

The Nuva Ring does not protect you from sexually transmitted diseases.

Many women report shorter, lighter, more regular periods while using the
Nuva Ring.  Many of the benefits associated with birth control pills are
similar with the Nuva Ring, including a reduction in:  non-cancerous
breast growths, ovarian cysts, cancers of the lining of the uterus and
cervix, pelic inflammatory disease, heavy menses, vaginal dryness and
pain on intercourse associate with menopause.

Some reported side effects of the Nuva Ring include:  weight loss or
gain, bleeding or spotting between periods, breast tenderness, changes
in mood, vaginal irritation and infection and increased vaginal
discharge.  These side effects though mild may clear up within two or
three months of continued use.  In clinical trials involving 2,500
women, one 1% to 2 1/2% of women discontinued the use of the Nuva Ring
due to side effects.  As with birth control pills, you are not protected
until the Nuva Ring has been in place for seven consecutive days.

