---
title: General Information
avatar: female_doctor_listening_to_patient
---

Sexually transmitted diseases (STDâ€™s) are infections usually transferred
from person to person through sexual contact. Other than the common cold
and flu, sexually transmitted diseases are the most common infectious
diseases.

Intercourse is the most common means of transmission, but in some cases
other intimate contact may transmit infection.

Young people, under the age of 25, that have multiple partners, are
prime candidates for a variety of STDs. If you are sexually active,
especially if you have a partner who may have had multiple partners, you
should learn all you can about STDs, and do everything possible to
prevent the transmission of them.

Although the best known STDs, syphilis and gonorrhea are decreasing in
frequency, the overall incidence of STD transmission continues to
increase.

Not all STDs have visible symptoms, even when you have a very contagious
STD. Pap smears alone do not detect or allow diagnoses of STDs. Ask your
health care provider to test you specifically for STDs at your next
appointment. If you have an STD, the doctor will treat it but your
partner should also see his doctor and be treated. You should not engage
in further intercourse until both you and your partner have completed
the prescribed treatment. Some STDs are easier to treat than others, but
prompt treatment is necessary to prevent transmission, and to prevent a
much longer and more serious complication called Pelvic Inflammatory
Disease (PID).

PID can interfere with your ability to get pregnant. It may also cause
pain when you have intercourse.

