---
title: Protecting Yourself from Domestic Violence
---

If you are involved in an abusive relationship, you must protect
yourself.

You should have a plan of action for when your safety is compromised.

Make a plan. Know where you will go, be prepared to physically leave
your house. Know how you can get away, and how you will get the children
to safety.

Be sure there are no guns in your home. Verbal abuse can escalate
quickly into physical abuse.

Talk with someone you trust, a family member or close friend. It may be
hard, and you may feel ashamed of what is happening, but you need to
speak to someone. Once you can talk about the problem, you can get some
support and maybe get help with making a plan. You may find that you
have a feeling of relief just because you have been able to confide in
someone.

Next, do some research. Find out what resources are available to you.
The National Coalition Against Domestic Violence Hotline is open Monday
through Friday 8AM to 5PM to provide information, advice and counseling.

Recognize the pattern of abuse. Make plans to leave the house before
things get out of hand. Leave as soon as you think danger is developing.
This will help you begin to break the cycle of violence.

The cycle begins with tension building, next is the batter phase (verbal
abuse) or (physical abuse), and ends with a period of tenderness,
apologies, and promises that it will never happen again.

Because many women love their partners they convince themselves that the
man will change. Without professional help however, the batterer will
most often become abusive again. Over time, the violence gets worse.

If you have been physically assaulted, it is important that you get
medical attention. Go to the Emergency Room or to your doctor. It may be
hard, but you should tell the truth about what has happened. Doctors can
often provide you with resources and guidance. Your doctor, or the
hospital may want to take pictures of your injuries. If you choose to
press charges, the medical record and photos can help show that you were
battered in the past.

It takes a lot of courage to face the fact that you are involved in an
abusive relationship. You should seek the help you need. You deserve a
better life.

