---
title: Privacy Policy
---

Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics is committed to protecting your privacy and
developing technology that gives you the most powerful and safe online
experience. This Statement of Privacy applies to the Tampa Bay Abortion
Clinics Web site and governs data collection and usage. By using the
Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics website, you consent to the data practices
described in this statement.

Collection of your Personal Information
---------------------------------------

Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics collects personally identifiable information,
such as your e-mail address, name, home or work address or telephone
number. Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics also collects anonymous demographic
information, which is not unique to you, such as your ZIP code, age,
gender, preferences, interests and favorites.

There is also information about your computer hardware and software that
is automatically collected by Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics. This
information can include: your IP address, browser type, domain names,
access times and referring Web site addresses. This information is used
by Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics for the operation of the service, to
maintain quality of the service, and to provide general statistics
regarding use of the Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics Web site.

Please keep in mind that if you directly disclose personally
identifiable information or personally sensitive data through Tampa Bay
Abortion Clinics public message boards, this information may be
collected and used by others. Note: Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics does not
read any of your private online communications.

Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics encourages you to review the privacy
statements of Web sites you choose to link to from Tampa Bay Abortion
Clinics so that you can understand how those Web sites collect, use and
share your information. Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics is not responsible
for the privacy statements or other content on Web sites outside of the
Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics and Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics family of Web
sites.

Use of your Personal Information
--------------------------------

Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics collects and uses your personal information
to operate the Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics Web site and deliver the
services you have requested. Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics also uses your
personally identifiable information to inform you of other products or
services available from Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics and its affiliates.
Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics may also contact you via surveys to conduct
research about your opinion of current services or of potential new
services that may be offered.

Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics does not sell, rent or lease its customer
lists to third parties. Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics may, from time to
time, contact you on behalf of external business partners about a
particular offering that may be of interest to you. In those cases, your
unique personally identifiable information (e-mail, name, address,
telephone number) is not transferred to the third party. In addition,
Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics may share data with trusted partners to help
us perform statistical analysis, send you email or postal mail, provide
customer support, or arrange for deliveries. All such third parties are
prohibited from using your personal information except to provide these
services to Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics, and they are required to
maintain the confidentiality of your information.

Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics does not use or disclose sensitive personal
information, such as race, religion, or political affiliations, without
your explicit consent.

Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics keeps track of the Web sites and pages our
customers visit within Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics, in order to determine
what Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics services are the most popular. This data
is used to deliver customized content and advertising within Tampa Bay
Abortion Clinics to customers whose behavior indicates that they are
interested in a particular subject area.

Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics Web sites will disclose your personal
information, without notice, only if required to do so by law or in the
good faith belief that such action is necessary to: (a) conform to the
edicts of the law or comply with legal process served on Tampa Bay
Abortion Clinics or the site; (b) protect and defend the rights or
property of Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics; and, (c) act under exigent
circumstances to protect the personal safety of users of Tampa Bay
Abortion Clinics, or the public.

Use of Cookies
--------------

The Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics Web site use "cookies" to help you
personalize your online experience. A cookie is a text file that is
placed on your hard disk by a Web page server. Cookies cannot be used to
run programs or deliver viruses to your computer. Cookies are uniquely
assigned to you, and can only be read by a web server in the domain that
issued the cookie to you.

One of the primary purposes of cookies is to provide a convenience
feature to save you time. The purpose of a cookie is to tell the Web
server that you have returned to a specific page. For example, if you
personalize Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics pages, or register with Tampa Bay
Abortion Clinics site or services, a cookie helps Tampa Bay Abortion
Clinics to recall your specific information on subsequent visits. This
simplifies the process of recording your personal information, such as
billing addresses, shipping addresses, and so on. When you return to the
same Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics Web site, the information you previously
provided can be retrieved, so you can easily use the Tampa Bay Abortion
Clinics features that you customized.

You have the ability to accept or decline cookies. Most Web browsers
automatically accept cookies, but you can usually modify your browser
setting to decline cookies if you prefer. If you choose to decline
cookies, you may not be able to fully experience the interactive
features of the Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics services or Web sites you
visit.

Security of your Personal Information
-------------------------------------

Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics secures your personal information from
unauthorized access, use or disclosure. Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics
secures the personally identifiable information you provide on computer
servers in a controlled, secure environment, protected from unauthorized
access, use or disclosure. When personal information (such as a credit
card number) is transmitted to other Web sites, it is protected through
the use of encryption, such as the Secure Socket Layer (SSL) protocol.

Changes to this Statement
-------------------------

Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics will occasionally update this Statement of
Privacy to reflect company and customer feedback. Tampa Bay Abortion
Clinics encourages you to periodically review this Statement to be
informed of how Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics is protecting your
information.

Contact Information
-------------------

Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics welcomes your comments regarding this
Statement of Privacy. If you believe that Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics has
not adhered to this Statement, please contact Tampa Bay Abortion Clinics
at <admin@tampabayabortionclinics.com.temp.realssl.com>. We will use
commercially reasonable efforts to promptly determine and remedy the
problem.

