---
title: About Medicaid
avatar: minority-female
---

Authorized in 1965, Medicaid is a joint federal-state program that
provides the nationâ€™s low-income population with basic health and
long-term care coverage.  Medicaid is the largest health care program in
the United States and covers more than 50 million people.  Under
Medicaid states receive federal matching funds to provide health care
for low-income individuals.  Medicaid coverage is critical to the health
care of millions of women.  More than 16 million women receive their
basic health and long-term coverage through Medicaid.  In 2003, Medicaid
covered one in ten women and one in five low-income women.  In 2003,
11.5% of women of reproductive age were covered by Medicaid.

Currently, all state Medicaid programs must cover pregnant women who
meet the federal income requirements.  Many states have elected to cover
women with incomes that are higher than the federal requirements.
However, this coverage is not without limits, and abortion services are
among the provisions that are most stringently regulated.

Medicaid Spending
-----------------

Medicaid is the largest form of aid to the states from the federal
government, comprising 43% of all federal grants.  As the national
economy has worsened, state tax revenue has lessened and health care
costs have continued to rise.  This resulted in more people eligible for
Medicaid.  This has placed pressure on states to control Medicaid costs,
typically the second largest budget expenditure.  The federal government
is also looking at scaling back Medicaid funding and has proposed to
reduce Medicaid spending by $35 billion over the next ten years.  These
cuts will especially impact women.

