---
title: Breasts Leaking
avatar: nurse_with_patient
---

If you are 9 or more weeks along in the pregnancy, it is possible that
you may have trouble with milk, or a milky fluid leaking from your
breasts after an abortion. The further along you were, the higher the
chance of having your "milk comes in". This can be upsetting, but it
won’t last for long. It is a normal effect of the hormones that your
body releases when you are no longer pregnant.

These hormones can make your body start to produce milk, whenever a
pregnancy is ended. Your breast may feel sore, tight, swollen, and will
leak out droplets of clear to whitish fluid. At times the milk may “let
down, and a substantial amount of liquid may come out. To help with this
stage, wear a well-fitting/snug bra, and try to avoid stimulation of
your breasts or nipples. Wear the bra 24 hours a day until your milk
dries up. It can take one to four weeks for the milk to dry up.

It will not be as painful as it originally feels when the milk first
comes in - as the milk is not "used" the pressure on the milk ducts will
cause the milk to "dry up". Keep wearing that snug-fitting bra, and take
Tylenol for the soreness and this will subside.

If you develop a fever, or extreme tenderness in either of your breasts,
call the Woman’s Health Center for a consult with the doctor. There is
also a condition where your milk glands can get infected, and this will
need to be treated with antibiotics. This is a very rare complication
but needs to be treated.

