---
title: Hormones During Pregnancy
---

A woman’s first pregnancy is one of the most exciting and dramatic
events of her life. As conception progresses to implantation, and
development of the pregnancy, numerous changes take place within the
woman’s body. While a woman’s physical changes may be obvious, several
other ones may be subtle, including a growing sense of emotional
turmoil, associated with how a woman feels about being pregnant, the
timing of the pregnancy, whether or not she is ready to start to grow
her family, whether or not she is in a stable relationship with a
partner, and or whether the pregnancy was planned or not. All of these
issues and more are in the mix. But, to some degree, these changes are
attributable to the hormones of pregnancy.

The first trimester of the pregnancy begins with conception. As egg and
sperm unite, and the fertilized egg implants into the endometrium or
uterine lining, a hormone called chorionic gondadotropin (HCG) is
produced. HCG has a very predictable rise in the early weeks of
pregnancy and peaks around 70 days. HCG is thought to support the
pregnancy by ensuring ovarian production of progesterone until the
placenta is well formed around the tenth week. HCG is thought to be the
hormone responsible for a number of symptoms associated with early
pregnancy, namely nausea and resultant vomiting and the sometimes
overwhelming fatigue that can plague the early expectant woman.

Progesterone is one of the major hormones of pregnancy and is primarily
produced by the placenta. Levels of progesterone in the body rise as the
pregnancy progresses. Progesterone functions to inhibit the smooth
muscle in the uterus from contracting and decreases prostaglandin
formation, both of which allow the fetus to grow with the expanding
uterus. As progesterone levels increases, other smooth muscle in the
body may be affected, such as that in the lower esophageal sphincter,
which results in increased heartburn and acid reflux, especially in the
later stages of pregnancy. Progesterone softens cartilage as well and
may be responsible for the commonly occurring hip and pubic bone pain
that also occurs. This hormone also can cause tenderness in the breasts
early on and the bloating feeling many women experience throughout
pregnancy.

Estrogens also increase during pregnancy and are also produced primarily
by the placenta. Among other functions, estrogen increases urine blood
flow. Prolactin, the hormone that allows for lactation postpartum, also
increases throughout pregnancy, and its production is thought to be
stimulated by increasing levels of estrogens.

The rise in estrogen, as well as progesterone and other hormones in
pregnancy, is also in part responsible for the magnification of emotions
a pregnant woman experiences. Increased circulation levels intensify the
myriad of feelings a pregnant woman has. Anxiety in regard to how a
woman may feel about herself and the way her body is changing is normal,
and her concerns regarding her own health and the health of the fetus
are paramount. Anticipation of the new role of being a mother and the
changes a new baby will bring to the family may be overwhelming. These
emotions may be heightened throughout the pregnancy, and will return to
normal once the hormones of pregnancy are gone.

After delivery or abortion, hormone levels decrease, and their fall may
contribute to a short period of readjustment. Most women understand how
these changing hormones of pregnancy have affected them, and recognize
that it takes time to regain their balance.

