---
title: Molar Pregnancy
avatar: nurse_with_patient
---

What is a "Molar pregnancy"?

: A molar pregnancy, also called "gestational trophoblastic disease" or
"Hydatidiform mole", is an abnormal development if the placenta, arising
from a problem with either the egg or the sperm during the fertilization
process. The placenta can either grow abnormally without any fetus being
present at all ("complete mole"), or the abnormal placental tissue can
co-exist with a fetus ("partial mole"). In this case the fetus usually
has severe defects. In the united States, the risk of molar pregnancy is
about one in a thousand.

How is a molar pregnancy diagnosed?

: A molar pregnancy can be suggested by the appearance of the abnormal
tissue on an ultrasound. The tissue appears "grape-like" as the normal
placental tissue grows. It can also be suggested by abnormally high
values of pregnancy hormone hCG - this is because the abnormal placenta
puts out large quantities of this hormone. The molar pregnancy will only
be definitely diagnosed, however, by an examination of the tissue, which
can be done either at the clinic immediately after your procedure, or at
the pathology laboratory to which your tissue has been sent.

How is a molar pregnancy treated?

: The usual treatment for a molar pregnancy is to evacuate (empty) the
uterus. This will usually resolve the problem, although close monitoring
afterwards is necessary to make certain that no further treatment is
needed.

Why is it important to comply with the recommended follow up for the
molar pregnancy?

: Your clinician will have recommended that you avoid pregnancy for one
year, and have regular blood tests for 6-12 months. The reason for this
is that in some cases a cancer (“chriocarcinoma”) can develop from the
molar tissue. This is one of the most easily treated cancers, but your
doctors need to find it in order to treat it, which is why having the
blood tests is so important.

Can I have a normal pregnancy after the molar gestation?

: Yes you can. There is a 1-2 % chance of having a recurrent (repeat)
molar pregnancy, but once your monitoring period is completed, there is
no reason that you could not have a perfectly normal pregnancy and
delivery.

