---
title: Rh Sensitization
no-title: true
avatar: hispanic_female_closeup
---

Abortion May Cause Rh Sensitization
===================================

Because you are pregnant and your blood is Rh negative, your physician
has recommended that you receive a protective injection of GAMULIN Rh
(Rh [D] immune globulin human).   Only 15% of women are Rh negative.

Let's Talk About Rh Sensitization
---------------------------------

We will start with the fact that there are four types of blood.  You
were born with one of these types of blood - A, B, AB or O.  In
addition, blood is also classified as Rh positive or Rh negative.  One
important reason for testing your blood is to determine if you are Rh
negative.  This is determined because an Rh-negative woman having an
abortion or miscarriage of an Rh-positive fetus (or full-term delivery
of an Rh-positive baby) may become sensitized to the Rh factor - and
this sensitization could dangerously affect any Rh-positive children she
may have in the future.

What happens is this:  Keeping in mind that your blood is Rh negative,
and that of the fetus is Rh positive, a small amount of blood from the
Rh-positive fetus may enter your bloodstream during pregnancy and
particularly during the abortion procedure.  Your body produces
antibodies (foreign substance fighters) as a natural protection against
the blood cells received from the fetus.  These antibodies have no
effect on your blood cells, and rarely on the blood cells of this fetus,
but they stay in your bloodstream and will find their way into the
bloodstream of a future fetus during your next pregnancy.

The antibodies will destroy blood cells in an Rh-positive fetus and when
the baby is born, it may have a condition known as hemolytic disease of
the newborn.  This is a very serious disease which may result in
permanent disability or even death of the child.  Chances of the disease
developing increase with each subsequent pregnancy.There is a method of
preventing the blood system from producing these antibodies in a woman
not already Rh sensitized.  This is another reason for testing your
blood, to see if you are already sensitized, either due to a prior
pregnancy that involved an Rh-positive fetus or due to having received
Rh-positive blood through transfusion.Sensitization to the Rh factor has
no effect upon your health during a pregnancy; it will affect only the
health of any future Rh-positive baby.

Because blood tests show that you are not Rh sensitized, you will be
given an injection, after the abortion, of a special protein product
called Gamulin Rh (Rh [D] immune globulin human) which will block the
formation of antibodies your body would otherwise produce.  This is a
highly effective means of preventing Rh sensitization and is a simple
method.Even though it is not always possible to determine the blood type
of a fetus, it is important that Gamulin Rh be given when a pregnancy is
aborted or miscarried.

Gamulin Rh is used for the prevention of hemolytic disease, not as a
cure.  Also, Gamulin Rh must be given after each pregnancy is terminated,
either in abortion or full-term delivery.  The protection supplied by
Gamulin Rh lasts only until your next pregnancy.  It is important that
you receive Gamulin Rh even if you do not intend to have any children in
the future.  This measure will protect you against Rh sensitization
which could cause problems if you ever received a transfusion of
Rh-positive blood, either accidentally or because Rh-negative blood was
not available for emergency transfusion.You may notice some tenderness
or soreness where you will receive your injection, but Gamulin seldom
produces any serious reaction.Now you know about Rh sensitization and
what it means to you and to any Rh-positive children you might have in
the future.

If you have any questions, do not hesitate to discuss them with your
doctor.

