---
title: Ultrasound
avatar: black-female
---

An Ultrasound is created when sound waves are reflected off specific
areas of the body...there is no radiation involved in the ultra sound
exams.

Here at {{data.name}}, we use two different types of Ultrasounds.

One is the Abdominal Ultrasound. A transducer, which looks like a
rounded curved scanner is glided over the abdomen to produce images that
we can measure to determine the gestational age of your pregnancy.

The second type of ultrasound uses a Trans Vaginal probe. This is a wand
that is inserted in the vagina and used to create images of your uterus.
For this exam, you will lie on your back with your feet in stirrups like
a pelvic exam. For early pregnancies, this type of ultrasound allows us
to more closely measure your pregnancy. When a pregnancy is very early,
it sits right down on the cervix. Viewing the pregnancy through the
vagina gives a closer look.

Ultrasound exam is painless and harmless. Because a gel is used to
enhance the way the transducers work you may feel a cool sensation when
the gel comes in contact with your body. There are no side effects
involved in Ultra Sound exams.

The Ultra Sound is performed by trained technicians. You may discuss the
results of your ultra sound with your doctor during your visit. Every
patient that comes to our facility for a termination of pregnancy will
have a sonogram as part of the preparation for her procedure. Knowing
the approximate gestation of your pregnancy helps the doctor provide the
safest, most appropriate procedure for you.

In order to proceed with a surgical termination we must be able to see
the structure of pregnancy in the uterus. This means that we must be
able to image the gestational sac and a yolk sac. This tells us that the
pregnancy is located in the uterus, and is not ectopic of molar.

Sometimes the pregnancy is too early to show up in the ultrasound. The
staff can discuss options with you. A chemical termination may be
appropriate, or you may be rescheduled to return for your procedure on a
future date.

