---
title: What You Should Know About Your Period
avatar: three_females_on_stairs
---

The average woman will have between 400 and 500 menstrual periods in her
lifetime.

Menstruation, menstrual periods, menses, monthly cycle, or periods are
all terms used to describe women’s monthly bleeding. Most menstrual
periods last between 3 - 5 days. The average age at which a girl begins
her period in the US is around the age of 12, but anywhere between 12
and 15 years of age is considered normal. Menopause is when a woman no
longer has her period. Typically this begins between 40 - 50 years of
age.

A menstrual cycle is the time from the first day of a woman’s period, to
the last day before her next period begins. Many women report a 28 day
cycle, but anywhere between 23 - 35 days is still normal.

Every month your body prepares to become pregnant. In the first half of
your cycle, a hormone called follicle-stimulating hormone signals your
body to release an egg. The hormone estrogen makes the lining of the
uterus grow to get ready for the released egg to be implanted. Midway
through the cycle, another hormone called luteinizing hormone tells your
ovary to release the egg. This is known as ovulation. Some women
experience pain during the release of the egg. Some women report they
can be moody during ovulation.

In the second half of the cycle, the egg begins its journey down the
fallopian tube. Progesterone (another hormone) kicks in and thickens the
uterine lining. If sperm fertilizes the egg, it continues down the tube
and implants in the uterus. Once the egg is attached to the uterine
wall, the hormones Progesterone and Estrogen levels increase rapidly to
keep the pregnancy growing. If the egg remains unfertilized, it either
dissolves or is reabsorbed. Because the uterus is not supporting a
pregnancy, hormone levels fall off and this signals the body to shed the
lining of the uterus. This lining is passed out of the body through the
vagina during the menstrual period.

This process is repeated every month. If a woman has no periods is is
called Amenorrhea. This may happen normally during breast feeding,
during periods of extreme weight loss, excessive exercise, extreme
stress or illness. Sometimes problems with the thyroid, pituitary or
other glands may be the reason. If a woman experiences Amenorrhea she
should have a complete physical to rule out any serious reasons for not
having a period regularly.

Dysmenorrhea, is the medical name for very painful periods. This can be
caused by a low pain threshold, endometriosis, a disease that occurs
when uterine tissue grows outside the uterus, or from the hormone
Prostaglandin. Ibuprofen, Aleve or aspirin may be helpful. If pain from
your period interferes with your ability to function you should see your
doctor for an evaluation and treatment plan.

Menorrhagia is when you have an excessively long or very hard period.
Many women will experience this at some point in their life, but if it
continues for a long time, your doctor will evaluate you for fibroids,
endometriosis or an undetected pregnancy. Menorrhagia usually involves
cycles shorter than 3 weeks, or when a woman soaks a pad or tampon an
hour for more than 24 hours.

Oligomenorrhea is a condition characterized by very light, infrequent
periods. Stress, travel or the flu or infection may cause and occasional
missed or light period. If this continues over time, your doctor will
want to check and see if you have a hormone imbalance, or polycystic
ovary syndrome (PCOS).

Some women experience spotting or bleeding between periods. This may be
expected from time to time. Heavy bleeding or many days of spotting
between periods may indicate an infection, or the presence on
noncancerous growths called polyps. If this occurs, you should see your
healthcare provider.

Problems with your period should be evaluated by you healthcare
provider. You will most likely be given a pelvic exam, a pregnancy test,
a pap smear, perhaps blood tests to check for infection and sometimes an
ultrasound exam. Often your doctor will suggest hormone based birth
control to regulate your period. These methods can control heavy
bleeding, cramping, and periods that are too frequent.

