---
title: Myth that Abortion Causes Depression
no-title: true
---

The Myth of "Post-Abortion Syndrome"
====================================

The concept of "post-abortion syndrome" as a traumatic response to
abortion is a myth, developed by those who seek to discourage women from
choosing abortion as an option when faced with an unwanted pregnancy.

According to the American Psychological Association, various factors,
such as emotional attachment to the pregnancy, lack of support, and
conservation views on abortion, may increase the likelihood of
experiencing negative reactions.  Studies have either failed to
establish a casual relationship between abortion and negative
phsychological symptoms experienced by women, or been conclusive.

In 2008, a team at Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore reviewed 21
studies involving more than 150,000 women, and determined:  "The best
quality studies indicate no significant differences in long-term mental
health between women in the United States who choose to terminate a
pregnancy and those who do not."  Dr. Robert Blum, the senior author on
the study, stated:  "The best research does not support the existence os
a 'post-abortion syndrome' similar to post-traumatic stress disorder."

A growing body of research has demonstrated that abortion does not cause
psychiatric illness.  Abortion often occurs under stressful
circumstances, such as poverty, lack of social supports, abandonment and
ongoing mental illness, as well as in the face of ostracism, including
antiabortion demonstrators at facilities where abortions are performed.

When the U.S. Surpreme Court's Roe v. Wade decision legalized abortion
in 1973, groups opposed to abortion on moral grounds began to strategize
about how to reverse the decision.  When moral arguments alone did not
previal, they looked for rationales that would prove more effective.
They attempted to demonstrate that abortion caused surgical
complications, infertility, or breast cancer.  These arguments have been
shown scientifically to be untrue.  They argued that parents should be
informed about and have the right to decide whether their underage
daughters could have abortions and that a waiting period should be
imposed before a request for abortion could be honored.  The Path
Project, and judicial bypass allows an underage woman to determine
whether or not she wants the courts assistance in bypassing this
barrier.

While the Anti-Choice political camp continue to fight to make all
abortions illegal, some of their illogical arguments have gained
traction and many new laws have been, and are being enacted, across the
country, making it more difficult to obtain an abortion.  We refer to
these unnecessary laws as barriers to Choice for women.

One in four women will face this choice in their own lifetime.  It is
for some an easy decision, for others, more difficult.  We trust women
to make the choice that is best for themselves and their families.

Until we as women demand our right to have all reproductive issues held
as a personal and private choice, the Anti-Choice movement will continue
to mount campaigns to take that right away.  If abortions become
illegal, women will seek to abort as they did in the past, with "back
alley" abortions, at home attempts, and other unsafe methods.  These
endanger the life and well being of all women.  We need to take a stand
to assure that abortion remains legal.  That medical doctors, in safe
and clean enviroments with well trained staff are able to continue to
provide this service.

As there is no scientific or medical evidence that abortion causes
mental health risks, we must respect that each woman knows her own
heart.  Women are capable of making the decision to carry to term a
pregancy, or terminate the pregnancy based on this knowledge of their
own lives, their own circumstances and their own needs.

The health risks of abortion must be compared with demonstrated
increased risk of going through pregnancy, labor, giving birth and
assuming responsibility for a newborn infant.  It is about a woman's
choice.  There is no scientific evidence that women without existing
mental health issues suffer any negative emotional consequences for
making an informed decision about her reproductive life.

