---
title: Morning After Pill
---

![hispanic female nurse]{: .float-right style="width: 180px; height: 270px;"}

Postcoital Hormonal Contraception (The Morning After Pill)
==========================================================

What is it?

: The "Morning After Pill" is a pill that was designed to be used for
contraception ("birth control") and is approved by the FDA for that use.
When prescribed as a "Morning After Pill", it must be used under the
supervision of a clinician, only as directed.

How does it work?

: One pill is taken within 72 hours of unprotected intercourse, then 12
hours later, one more pill is taken.  Your next menstrual period should
begin sometime within the next two to three weeks.  When used in this
manner, the pills may keep the ovary from releasing an egg, prevent egg
and sperm from joining and/or change the lining of the uterus in such a
way that if an egg is fertilized, the egg may not implant and develop
into a pregnancy.

Effectiveness

: The "Morning After Pill" is not 100% effective.  Some pregnancies do
occur because a fertilized egg has already implanted, too much time has
gone by in between unprotected intercourse and taking the pills, or due
to a failure of the drug itself.  You must return to the clinic in three
weeks for a FREE pregnancy test.

Who can use it

: Not all women should not be given the "Morning After Pill".  The
decision to prescribe this drug must be based on complete and accurate
information given by the patient about her past and present health, the
time of unprotected intercourse, and a highly sensitive pregnancy test.
A few conditions rule out the "Morning After Pill" entirely:  having
blood clots, inflammation of the veins, serious liver disease,
unexplained bleeding from the vagina, any suspicion of abnormal growth
or cancer of the breast or reproductive organs, or an already
established pregnancy.  In rare cases, there is a slightly greater
chance of developing certain serious problems, such as blood clots,
stroke and heart attack (women age 35 or older, who smoke heavily are at
greatest risk).

Common Reactions

: The most common noted reactions are:
  - nausea and/or vomiting
  - breast tenderness
  - irregular bleeding and headaches

Possible Problems

: Some studies have shown that some offspring of women who take estrogen
hormones during pregnancy have birth defects of their reproductive
systems.  Symptoms to report to a doctor are:  chest or arm pain,
shortness of breath, unusual pain or swelling in the legs, severe
headaches, eye problems such as blurred or double vision, pain in the
abdomen, yellowing of the skin or eyes or severe depression.

If you see a doctor for any reason before you have a menstrual period,
be sure to tell him, or her that you are taking or have taken the
"morning after pill".

For a private information session, call the Clinic for details.

[hispanic female nurse]: {{urls.media}}/hispanic_female_nurse.jpg

