---
title: RU486 Pill
no-title: true
avatar: ru486
---

RU486 Mifeprex
==============

Many women prefer this option to a surgical abortion because they feel
it is more natural, less invasive, and can be done in the privacy of
their own homes.  This option is available to women between 5 and 8
weeks gestation.  This procedure requires several visits to the clinic
for follow-up.  RU486 is approximately 93% effective.

Our patients are given one dose of Mifrex orally in our clinic during
their first visit.  24-48 hours later, at home, our patients insert 4
additional tablets either between their cheek and gums, or vaginally and
allow the pills to dissolve.  The Mifeprex stops the growth of the
pregnancy and the Cytotec causes the cervix to open and expel the
contents of the uterus.

Most women report that several hours after they insert the Cytotec, they
begin to cramp and bleed.  This cramping and bleeding can be fairly
light, or may be moderately heavy.  Each woman experiences it
differently.  You may soak 10-12 pads over several hours.  Some women
report passing clots and some tissue.  For some women, the bleeding does
not start until quite a few hours after insertion, or even the next day.
Because the process can take some time, we suggest that our patients
make arrangements for childcare, and take off work on the day of
insertion.

Our patients return to the clinic in one or two weeks for a follow-up
sonogram and/or blood tests to confirm that they have passed the
pregnancy.

If this procedure fails to terminate the pregnancy, there will be an
additional charge for those patients who need a surgical aspiration.

