---
title: Pelvic Inflammatory Disease (PID)
avatar: hispanic-female-smiling
---

What is a Pelvic Inflammatory Disease?

: Pelvic Inflammatory Disease is a general term that refers to an
infection of the uterus (or womb), the fallopian tubes, and other
reproductive organs. Sometimes PID is a serious complication of sexually
transmitted diseases. PID can damage the fallopian tubes, and the tissue
in the uterus and ovaries. This is why it is so important to diagnose
and treat Pelvic Inflammatory Disease. Some consequences of leaving this
condition untreated are: infertility, increased potential for ectopic
pregnancy, an abscess in the uterus or tubes, and /or chronic pelvic
pain.

Is PID a Common Problem?

: It is estimated that more than 100,000 women become infertile each
year as a consequence of PID. More than a million women each year
experience an acute episode of PID in the United States alone. Some
Experts feel that many ectopic pregnancies each year are caused by
untreated PID.

How Do Women Get Pelvic Inflammatory Disease?

: PID is caused by bacteria moving from the vagina or cervix, to the
uterus and other reproductive organs. Many cases are associated with
Chlamydia and gonorrhea, although these are not the only bacteria that
cause PID. If you have had an episode of PID in the past, you are at
higher risk of contracting PID again.

: Sexually active women in the reproductive years have the most risk.
Women under the age of 25 usually have a higher risk also. Doctors
believe that this is because the cervix of younger women is not fully
matured, making her more susceptible to the STD’s that contribute to
PID.

: Women who douche are at higher risk of developing PID. Research has
shown that douching changes the natural bacterial balance in the vagina,
and can contribute to driving bacteria into the upper reproductive
organs.

: The more sex partners a woman has, the more likely she is to develop
PID. If a woman’s partner has had a number of other sexual partners,
the woman again is at a higher risk. This is because the male partner
has a greater chance of spreading STD’s to her.

: Lastly, women who have IUDs inserted have a slightly higher risk for
PIDs. This is usually due to existing, undiagnosed STDs present at the
time of insertion. This is one of the most important reasons why we, at
the Woman’s Health Centers, require in depth screening for STDs prior to
inserting an IUD.

Signs and Symptoms of Pelvic Inflammatory Disease

: Many women will experience lower abdominal pain. Other signs include
fever, unusual discharge that may have a foul odor, painful intercourse,
painful urination, irregular menstrual bleeding, or pain in the right
upper abdomen. Some women experience no symptoms at all. This
contributes to a delayed diagnosis. Serious damage can be done, while a
woman has no indication of infection. An annual pap smear with thorough
STD testing is important for all sexually active women.

How is PID Diagnosed?

: PID can be difficult to diagnose unless a woman has symptoms. Standard
STD testing, along with a good medical/reproductive health history and
physical exam is the best defense. Your doctor can order tests to rule
out other diagnosis with similar symptoms. Sometimes the doctor will
order an ultrasound. In some cases, a laparoscopic exam is done (a
lighted tube is inserted through a small incision in the abdomen).  This
allows the doctor to view the internal reproductive organs.

What is the treatment for Pelvic inflammatory Disease?

: PID can be cured with antibiotics. Antibiotics do not however, reverse
damage already done to the reproductive organs. Because of the
difficulty in identifying exactly which organism is responsible for the
PID, often, a combination of several antibiotics is prescribed. These
antibiotics can be given orally or by injection. A woman’s partner
should also be treated to prevent re-infection, even if the partner has
no symptoms. Very severe cases may require hospitalization for IV
antibiotics and/or surgery.

How can I protect myself from PID?

: Get early treatment for STDs. Abstaining from all sexual activity
prevents the spread of STDs but is an unlikely solution for most women.
Long term, monogamous relationships with partners, who have been tested,
and are known to be free of STDs is a good solution. The use of condoms
lowers the risk of STD transmission. For women with multiple partners,
especially under the age of 25, it is recommended that annual STD
testing be done.

: Any genital symptoms such as an unusual sore, discharge with odor,
burning during urination, pain on intercourse, or bleeding between
periods should be evaluated by your healthcare provider.

: Sexual activity should not resume until both partners are examined and
treated once an STD is suspected.

